Adds documentation for usage with Rails forms (#946)
ViewComponent/view_component: docs/practical-examples/forms.md

---
layout: default
title: Forms
parent: Practical Examples
---

# Forms

## Table of contents

1. [Before you start](#before-you-start)
2. [Using form helpers inside a `ViewComponent`](#using-form-helpers-inside-a-view-component)
3. [Creating your own input elements](#creating-your-own-input-elements)
    1. [Writing input elements in vanilla html](#writing-input-elements-in-vanilla-html)
4. [Gotchas and known issues](#gotchas-and-known-issues)

## Before you start
It's important to understand the building blocks of forms in Ruby on Rails before attempting to use `ViewComponent` to enhance them.

Please refer to the official documentation and Rails Guides to get up to speed.

> - `ActionView` form helpers [visit](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ActionView` form helpers [visit](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html){:target="_blank"}
```

- The different helper methods you can call on the `FormBuilder` instance to create input fields (e.g. `form.text_field`)
- The conventions set by Rails to [name parameters](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"}

## Using form helpers inside a `ViewComponent`

If your component needs to render a form, you can use the `form_with` helpers just as you would in a Rails template or patial

```ruby
# app/components/comment_form_component.rb
class CommentFormComponent < ApplicationComponent
  def initialize(comment:)
    @comment = comment
  end
  attr_reader :comment
end
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| %>
  <%= form.label :content %>
  <%= form.text_area :content %>
<% end %>
```

## Creating your own input elements

Let's imagine you want to abstract the `label` and `text_area` into a single reusable class or method. Rails has done forms for quite a while now and they have a very stable API. Because of this, it's better to leverage the framework's conventions for extending the dsl available to create forms.

> ### ⛔️ Bad: Passing the `FormBuilder` instance to a component

Reviewer 2: I would ask "why?" reading this. Can we add some arguments here, or is the last paragraph enough?

Author: Thanks for pointing it out. After reading this with a fresh set of eyes I definitely saw an opportunity to enhance it. I restructured and rewrote this section. Let me know what you think!

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| %>
  <%= render TextAreaWithLabelComponent.new(form: form) %>
<% end %>
```

### ✅ Good: Use `FormBuilder` methods

> 💡 To understand how `FormBuilder` works, it's a good idea to see how the [default class](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/actionview/lib/action_view/helpers/form_helper.rb){:target="_blank"} in Rails defines helper

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
💡 To understand how `FormBuilder` works, it's a good idea to see how the [default class](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/actionview/lib/action_view/helpers/form_helper.rb){:target="_blank"} in Rails defines helpers
```

```ruby
class YourCustomFormBuilder < ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder
  def text_area_with_label(attribute, **options)
    @template.capture do
      @template.concat label(attribute, options.merge(class: 'your-css-classes')
      @template.concat text_area(attribute, options.merge(class: 'your-css-classes')
    end
  end
end
```
👀 Note that you need to define the `builder` that `form_with` should use

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment, builder: YourCustomFormBuilder) do |form| %>
  <%= form.text_area_with_label :content %>
<% end %>
```

### ✅ Best: Abstract the markup into a `ViewComponent`

> In order to clean up your `FormBuilder` and be able to test the markup in isolation, you can extract the code inside the form builder method into a `ViewComponent`. This is very similar to what [Rails' internals](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/d3f4db9e95a475822c02b29241a5d07cbcff6fd5/actionview/lib/action_view/helpers/form_helper.rb#L1151){:target="_blank"} do to create it's default form helpers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to clean up your `FormBuilder` and be able to test the markup in isolation, you can extract the code inside the form builder method into a `ViewComponent`. This is very similar to what [Rails' internals](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/d3f4db9e95a475822c02b29241a5d07cbcff6fd5/actionview/lib/action_view/helpers/form_helper.rb#L1151){:target="_blank"} do to create their default form helpers.
```

Let's extract the code from the previous example into a `ViewComponent`

```ruby
class YourCustomFormBuilder < ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder
  # Note: (attribute, **options) is an oversimplification of the arguments passed into
  # a form builder method and a ViewComponent. Take a look at the links above to understand
  # how default form builder methods work, which arguments they receive, etc.
  def text_area_with_label(attribute, **options)
    @template.render TextAreaWithLabelComponent.new(attribute: attribute, **options)
  end
end
```

```ruby
class TextAreaWithLabelComponent < ApplicationComponent
  def initialize(attribute:, **options)
    @attribute = attribute
  end
  attr_reader :attribute
end
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/text_area_with_label_component.html.erb -->
<div class='maybe-some-wrapper-class'>

>   label_tag attribute, class: 'your-label-css-classes'
>   text_area_tag attribute, class: 'your-text-area-classes'

Reviewer: I think the erb tags are missing?

```suggestion
  <%= label_tag attribute, class: 'your-label-css-classes' %>
  <%= text_area_tag attribute, class: 'your-text-area-classes' %>
```

</div>
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment, builder: YourCustomFormBuilder) do |form| %>
  <%= form.text_area_with_label :content %>
<% end %>
```

#### Writing input elements in vanilla HTML

> Nothing is really stopping you from using regular `<input>` tags instead of Rails' helper methods. However, is important for your own implementations to follow the conventions set by other form helpers. If you plan to do so, please read the [Understanding Parameter Naming Conventions](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"} section of the `form_helpers` Rails guide.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nothing is really stopping you from using regular `<input>` tags instead of Rails' helper methods. However, it is important for your own implementations to follow the conventions set by other form helpers. If you plan to do so, please read the [Understanding Parameter Naming Conventions](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"} section of the `form_helpers` Rails guide.
```

## Gotchas and Known Issues

### Using multiple `FormBuilder`s in your application

> In a typical Rails application, all views renderred by controllers that intherit from your `ApplicationController` will use the default `FormBuilder` provided by the framework. However you are able to override the which `FormBuilder` a section of your application uses. We previously saw that you can do so using the `builder` argument in `form_with` but you can also configure it at a [`controller` level](https://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionController/FormBuilder.html){:target="_blank"}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a typical Rails application, all views rendered by controllers that inherit from your `ApplicationController` will use the default `FormBuilder` provided by the framework. However, you can override the default `FormBuilder` used by your application wherever you think necessary. We previously saw that you can do so using the `builder` argument in `form_with` but you can also configure it at a [`controller` level](https://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionController/FormBuilder.html){:target="_blank"}.
```

This is currently *not supported* by `ViewComponent`. To overcome this, apply the correct form builder each time to the `form_with` method.
### Passing the form builder object to a `ViewComponent`

> In the previous section we discouraged passing an instance of a `FormBuilder` to a `ViewComponent` to create new input types. However, there are legitimate cases to do this. For example, is common in some Rails applications to extract the fields of a form into their own patial:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous section we discouraged passing an instance of a `FormBuilder` to a `ViewComponent` to create new input types. However, there are legitimate cases to do this. For example, is common in some Rails applications to extract the fields of a form into their own partial:
```

> In the previous section we discouraged passing an instance of a `FormBuilder` to a `ViewComponent` to create new input types. However, there are legitimate cases to do this. For example, is common in some Rails applications to extract the fields of a form into their own patial:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the previous section we discouraged passing an instance of a `FormBuilder` to a `ViewComponent` to create new input types. However, there are legitimate cases to do this. For example, it is common in some Rails applications to extract the fields of a form into their own partial:
```

```console
/app
  /views
    /comments
      new.html.erb
      edit.html.erb
      _form.html.erb
      _fields.html.erb
```

```erb
# form.html.erb

> <%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| =>
>   <%= render 'fields', form: form%>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| %>
  <%= render 'fields', form: form %>
```

---
layout: default
title: Forms
parent: Practical Examples
---

# Forms

## Table of contents

1. [Before you start](#before-you-start)
2. [Using form helpers inside a `ViewComponent`](#using-form-helpers-inside-a-view-component)
3. [Creating your own input elements](#creating-your-own-input-elements)
    1. [Writing input elements in vanilla html](#writing-input-elements-in-vanilla-html)
4. [Gotchas and known issues](#gotchas-and-known-issues)

> ## Before you start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Before you start

```

It's important to understand the building blocks of forms in Ruby on Rails before attempting to use `ViewComponent` to enhance them.

Please refer to the official documentation and Rails Guides to get up to speed.

- `ActionView` form helpers [visit](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html){:target="_blank"}
- `ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder` [visit](https://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/FormBuilder.html){:target="_blank"}

After reading these, you should have a good understanding of:

> - The `form_with` helper used to create an HTML `<form>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- The `form_with` helper used to create an HTML `<form>`
```

- `FormBuilder` and the instance yielded to the `form_with` block
- The different helper methods you can call on the `FormBuilder` instance to create input fields (e.g. `form.text_field`)
- The conventions set by Rails to [name parameters](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"}

## Using form helpers inside a `ViewComponent`

> If your component needs to render a form, you can use the `form_with` helpers just as you would in a Rails template or patial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your component needs to render a form, you can use the `form_with` helpers just as you would in a Rails template or partial
```

```ruby
# app/components/comment_form_component.rb
class CommentFormComponent < ApplicationComponent
  def initialize(comment:)
    @comment = comment
  end
  attr_reader :comment
end
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| %>
  <%= form.label :content %>
  <%= form.text_area :content %>
<% end %>
```

## Creating your own input elements

As your application grows, you might want to create more complex input types comprised of labels, inputs, wrapping

> divs, error messages, hints etc. To do this, Rails allows you to overwrite or create new form helpers to do this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
divs, error messages, hints etc. To do this, Rails allows you to overwrite or create new form helpers.
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment, builder: YourCustomFormBuilder) do |form| %>
  <%= form.text_area_with_label :content %>
<% end %>
```

### Using View Components

For simple markup the example above might be just fine. However, writing a lot of markup using `capture`,
`content_tag`, etc. and concatenating using `concat` or `+` might not be too easy. For this purpose you can abstract
the markup to a ViewComponent.

#### ⛔️ Discouraged: Passing the FormBuilder instance to a ViewComponent

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| %>
  <%= render TextAreaWithLabelComponent.new(form: form) %>
<% end %>
```

Even though this is technically possible*, it's not very idiomatic within the context of Rails forms to do so. Rails
already provides a stable api to interact with forms.

\* _There is a [known issue](#gotchas-and-known-issues) in `ViewComponent` when doing this but passing a
`FormBuilder` instance is a common enough pattern to grant showing it here._

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  end
end
```

```ruby
class TextAreaWithLabelComponent < ApplicationComponent
  def initialize(attribute:, **options)
    @attribute = attribute
  end
  attr_reader :attribute
end
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/text_area_with_label_component.html.erb -->
<div class='maybe-some-wrapper-class'>
  <%= label_tag attribute, class: 'your-label-css-classes' %>
  <%= text_area_tag attribute, class: 'your-text-area-classes' %>
</div>
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment, builder: YourCustomFormBuilder) do |form| %>
  <%= form.text_area_with_label :content %>
<% end %>
```

#### Writing input elements in vanilla HTML

Nothing is really stopping you from using regular `<input>` tags instead of Rails' helper methods. However, it is important for your own implementations to follow the conventions set by other form helpers. If you plan to do so, please read the [Understanding Parameter Naming Conventions](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"} section of the `form_helpers` Rails guide.

> ## Gotchas and Known Issues
> ### Passing the form builder object to a `ViewComponent`
> In the previous section we discouraged passing an instance of a `FormBuilder` to a `ViewComponent` to create new input types. However, there are legitimate cases to do this. For example, it is common in some Rails applications to extract the fields of a form into their own partial:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Gotchas and Known Issues

### Passing the form builder object to a `ViewComponent`

In the previous section we discouraged passing an instance of a `FormBuilder` to a `ViewComponent` to create new input types. However, there are legitimate cases to do this. For example, it is common in some Rails applications to extract the fields of a form into their own partial:
```

- The conventions set by Rails to [name parameters](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"}

## Using form helpers inside a `ViewComponent`

If your component needs to render a form, you can use the `form_with` helpers just as you would in a Rails template or partial

```ruby
# app/components/comment_form_component.rb
class CommentFormComponent < ApplicationComponent
  def initialize(comment:)
    @comment = comment
  end
  attr_reader :comment
end
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment) do |form| %>
  <%= form.label :content %>
  <%= form.text_area :content %>
<% end %>
```

## Creating your own input elements

As your application grows, you might want to create more complex input types comprised of labels, inputs, wrapping
divs, error messages, hints etc. To do this, Rails allows you to overwrite or create new form helpers.

We'll use the simple example presented above to demonstrate how to create an abstraction for a field with input and
label.

### Using `FormBuilder` methods

> The first level of abstraction you can use is to create a new `FormBuilder` for your application and create your new

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One approach is to create a new `FormBuilder` and write a new
```

helper method called `text_area_with_label`. Note that this form builder inherits from

> `ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder` which provides all default form builder methods for you.

Reviewer 4: As a general note, I believe we should be letting Jekyll handle newlines, not adding them ourselves.

> `ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder` which provides all default form builder methods for you.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder` which provides all default form builder methods.
```

> 💡 To understand how `FormBuilder` works, it's a good idea to see how the [default class](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/actionview/lib/action_view/helpers/form_helper.rb){:target="_blank"} in Rails defines helpers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_Note: To understand how `FormBuilder` works, it's a good idea to see how the [default class](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/actionview/lib/action_view/helpers/form_helper.rb) in Rails defines helpers._
```

```ruby

> # app/form_builders/your_custom_form_builder.rb

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# app/form_builders/custom_form_builder.rb
```

> # The name of the folder doesn't really matter as long as it's inside
> # your app folder for rails to autoload it.
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> class YourCustomFormBuilder < ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
class CustomFormBuilder < ActionView::Helpers::FormBuilder
```

  def text_area_with_label(attribute, **options)
    @template.capture do
      @template.concat label(attribute, options.merge(class: 'your-css-classes')
      @template.concat text_area(attribute, options.merge(class: 'your-css-classes')
    end
  end
end
```

> To use `YourCustomFormBuilder` you can either define it in your controllers or directly as an argument to `form_with`. In this example, we'll pass it as an argument to `form_with`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use `YourCustomFormBuilder` either define it in a controller or directly as an argument to `form_with`. In this example, it's passed as an argument to `form_with`:
```

```erb
<!-- app/components/comment_form_component.html.erb -->
<%= form_with(model: comment, builder: YourCustomFormBuilder) do |form| %>
  <%= form.text_area_with_label :content %>
<% end %>
```

> ### Using View Components

Reviewer 4: Using ViewComponents for what?

  <%= form.text_area_with_label :content %>
<% end %>
```

#### Writing input elements in vanilla HTML

Nothing is really stopping you from using regular `<input>` tags instead of Rails' helper methods. However, it is important for your own implementations to follow the conventions set by other form helpers. If you plan to do so, please read the [Understanding Parameter Naming Conventions](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html#understanding-parameter-naming-conventions){:target="_blank"} section of the `form_helpers` Rails guide.

## Gotchas and Known Issues

### Using multiple `FormBuilder`s in your application
In a typical Rails application, all views rendered by controllers that inherit from your `ApplicationController` will use the default `FormBuilder` provided by the framework. However, you can override the default `FormBuilder` used by your application wherever you think necessary. We previously saw that you can do so using the `builder` argument in `form_with` but you can also configure it at a [`controller` level](https://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionController/FormBuilder.html){:target="_blank"}.

> This is currently *not supported* by `ViewComponent`. To overcome this, apply the correct form builder each time to the `form_with` method.

Reviewer 5: What part of this is not supported by ViewComponent? Do you have an example of something that doesn't work? I have a custom form builder in my application, and it renders components similar to how you have shown above. I set the form builder in my `ApplicationController` and it works fine. To me this is just the way Rails works. I'm not understanding what setting a form builder has to do with ViewComponent at all.

Author: Thanks for raising this @davekaro. I used this a few months ago and it didn't work correctly for me but maybe things have changed since then. I removed this section for now.

I'll test this with the current version of ViewComponent to make sure it's actually an issue and update the documentation in a separate PR if necessary. I think I jumped the gun there 🙈. Sorry and thanks for pointing it out!
